# Euler problem 2: Even Fibonacci Numbers

## Statement

Each new term in the Fibonacci sequence is generated by adding the previous two
terms. By starting with $1$ and $2$, the first $10$ terms will be: $1, 2, 3, 5,
8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, \dots$

By considering the terms in the Fibonacci sequence whose values do not exceed
four million, find the sum of the even-valued terms.

Reference: https://projecteuler.net/problem=2

## Algorithm A

**Generalisation:** For any increasing sequence, accumulate in a given way the
terms whose values do not exceed `bound` and that fulfil a condition.

Generate all the terms of the sequence up to `bound` included and accumulate
those that fulfil the condition.

## Algorithm B

**Generalisation:** Find the sum of the even terms in the Fibonacci sequence
whose values do not exceed `bound`.

The even Fibonacci numbers appear with a period of 3 in the sequence. Let's find
a recurrence formula to compute them directly:

* $f_{n+3} = f_{n+2} + f_{n+1} \Rightarrow f_{n+1} = f_{n+3} - f_n - f_{n+1} =
  (f_{n+3} - f_n)/2$
* $f_{n+2} = f_{n+1} + f_n = (f_{n+3} + f_n)/2$
* $f_{n+4} = f_{n+3} + f_{n+2} = f_{n+3} + (f_{n+3} + f_n)/2 = (3 f_{n+3} +
  f_n)/2$
* $f_{n+5} = f_{n+4} + f_{n+3} = (3 f_{n+3} + f_n)/2 + f_{n+3} = (5 f_{n+3} +
  f_n)/2$
* $f_{n+6} = f_{n+5} + f_{n+4} = (5 f_{n+3} + f_n)/2 + (3 f_{n+3} + f_n)/2 = 4
  f_{n+3} + f_n$

Thus every three Fibonacci numbers are bound together by the relation $f_{n+6} =
4 f_{n+3} + f_n$. Therefore, the even Fibonacci numbers are generated by the
relation $g_{n+2} = 4 g_{n+1} + g_{n}$, with $g_1=2$ and $g_2=8$.

The algorithm consists in generating the even Fibonacci numbers up to `bound`
included and adding them together in an accumulator.

## Discussion

Algorithm A is fairly general, but it is efficient only if a fair fraction of
the terms of the sequence fulfil the condition. In the case of the Fibonacci
sequence, only 1 term out of three is even.

Algorithm B is more efficient, but it requires that the terms that fulfil the
condition (here: to be even) can be generated directly from previous terms which
also fulfil that condition.